.TH GSYNCH 1 "April 2026" "gsynch" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gsynch \- deterministic one-way synchronization from a remote Git repository
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gsynch
[\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBgsynch\fR synchronizes the contents of a remote Git repository and branch
into the current working directory using Git's tree-restore mechanisms. It is
designed for deterministic, reproducible workflows where the remote repository
acts as the authoritative source of truth.

The tool performs a one-way mirror of the upstream tree into the local working
directory. Local changes are protected by default and require explicit override
flags to be overwritten.

If the current directory is empty, \fBgsynch\fR performs a clone of the
configured branch into \fB.\fR and removes the \fIorigin\fR remote to prevent
accidental pushes.

If the directory is not a Git repository, \fBgsynch\fR initializes one and
creates an initial commit from the existing contents to provide a baseline for
diffs and restores.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BR --branch " " \fIBRANCH\fR
Branch name to synchronize from. Default: \fImain\fR.

.TP
.BR --url " " \fIURL\fR
Remote URL of the upstream repository. Required unless provided via
\fBGSYNCH_URL\fR.

.TP
.BR --only " " \fIPATH\fR
Restrict synchronization to a subdirectory of the upstream tree. Only files
under the specified path will be restored.

.TP
.BR --dry-run
Show what would happen without modifying the working tree or index. No files
are restored, no commits are created, and no stashes are made.

.TP
.BR --no-commit
Apply changes and stage them, but do not create a commit. Useful for inspection
or integration into larger workflows.

.SS Override Options
\fBgsynch\fR classifies local state into three classes: staged, modified, and
untracked. By default, any local changes in these classes cause synchronization
to abort.

The following options allow selective overriding of this protection:

.TP
.BR --override-staged
Allow overwriting staged changes. Without this flag, the presence of staged
changes causes \fBgsynch\fR to abort.

.TP
.BR --override-modified
Allow overwriting modified tracked files in the working tree.

.TP
.BR --override-untracked
Allow overwriting untracked files whose paths collide with files in the
upstream tree.

.TP
.BR --override-all
Equivalent to \fB--override-staged\fR, \fB--override-modified\fR, and
\fB--override-untracked\fR. Allows all local changes and colliding untracked
files to be overwritten.

.SS Forced Push Handling

.TP
.BR --allow-forced-push
Allow synchronization to continue even if a forced push is detected on the
upstream branch.

By default, \fBgsynch\fR aborts when a forced push is detected to avoid
silently rewriting local history. This option makes the destructive nature of
continuing explicit.

.SS Help

.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show a brief help message and exit.

.SH BEHAVIOR

.SS Empty Directory
If the current directory contains no files, \fBgsynch\fR performs:

.nf
git clone --branch BRANCH URL .
git remote remove origin
.fi

and exits. This bootstraps the working tree without leaving a push-capable
\fIorigin\fR remote.

.SS Non-Git Directory
If the directory is not a Git repository, \fBgsynch\fR runs:

.nf
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial import of existing working directory"
.fi

to create a baseline commit for deterministic diffs and restores.

.SS Local Change Classification
\fBgsynch\fR classifies local state into:

.IP 

\fIStaged\fR: tracked files with changes in the index.

.IP 

\fIModified\fR: tracked files with changes in the working tree.

.IP 

\fIUntracked\fR: files not tracked by Git.

.SS Default Blocking Behavior
Without override flags:

.IP 

Any staged or modified files cause \fBgsynch\fR to abort.

.IP 

Untracked files that would be overwritten by incoming files cause
\fBgsynch\fR to abort.

.SS Override Semantics
If any override flag is provided:

.IP 

Classes with an override are overwritten.

.IP 

Classes without an override are preserved (skipped during restore).

This allows fine-grained control over destructive behavior.

.SS Forced Push Detection
After fetching, \fBgsynch\fR compares the previous and new upstream commit.
If the previous commit is not an ancestor of the new commit, a forced push is
detected.

Default behavior:

.IP 

Print a warning and abort.

With \fB--allow-forced-push\fR:

.IP 

Continue despite the forced push.

.SS Subdirectory Synchronization
Use:

.nf
gsynch --only path/to/subdir
.fi

to restrict synchronization to a subtree of the upstream repository.

.SS Dry Run Mode
Use:

.nf
gsynch --dry-run
.fi

to preview all changes without modifying the working tree or index.

.SS No Commit Mode
Use:

.nf
gsynch --no-commit
.fi

to stage changes without committing them.

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
.B GSYNCH_URL
Default URL for the upstream repository.

.TP
.B GSYNCH_BRANCH
Default branch name for synchronization.

.SH EXIT STATUS

.TP
0
Synchronization completed successfully or no changes were necessary.

.TP
>0
An error occurred, or local state prevented synchronization under the current
override and forced-push settings.

.SH SEE ALSO
git(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Nadim.

