.\" gsynch(1) — deterministic one-way Git synchronization
.TH GSYNCH 1 "April 2026" "gsynch" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
gsynch \- deterministic one-way synchronization from a remote Git repository

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gsynch
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
gsynch synchronizes the current working directory with a specific commit from
a remote Git repository. It performs a deterministic overwrite using
\fBgit restore --source\fR, preserving traceability and allowing clean reverts.

If the directory is not a Git repository, gsynch initializes one, stages all
existing files, and creates an initial commit. This ensures that future
synchronizations can revert individual files cleanly.

The upstream commit message is used for the local commit. Tags pointing at the
upstream commit are mirrored locally.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB--remote\fR <name>
Remote name (default: r2).

.TP
\fB--branch\fR <branch>
Branch name (default: main).

.TP
\fB--url\fR <url>
Remote URL.

.TP
\fB--only\fR <path>
Synchronize only a specific subdirectory.

.TP
\fB--dry-run\fR
Preview all changes without modifying anything.

.TP
\fB--force\fR
Override safety checks.

.TP
\fB--no-commit\fR
Apply changes but do not commit.

.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Show help.

.SH SAFETY
gsynch refuses to run if the working tree or index contains uncommitted
changes, or if untracked files would be overwritten. Use \fB--force\fR to
override.

.SH EXAMPLES

.SS Basic sync
Synchronize using default remote, branch, and URL:

    gsynch

.SS Sync from a specific remote and branch
    gsynch --remote upstream --branch dev --url https://github.com/example/project

.SS Sync only a subdirectory
    gsynch --only src/lib

Restores only files under \fIsrc/lib\fR from the upstream commit.

.SS Preview changes (dry run)
    gsynch --dry-run

Shows which files would change, which untracked files would be overwritten,
which tags would be mirrored, and whether a commit would be created.

.SS Apply changes without committing
    gsynch --no-commit

Useful for inspection or combining multiple syncs into one commit.

.SS Override all safety checks
    gsynch --force

Bypasses dirty-tree protection and untracked-file collision detection.

.SH INTENDED USE
gsynch is ideal for mirroring template repositories, synchronizing vendor or
third-party code, maintaining reproducible snapshots of external sources, and
keeping local directories aligned with upstream commits. It is intentionally
one-directional and never pushes or merges.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by nadim.

.SH SEE ALSO
git(1)
